RFC Proposal for Grouped MatMul operator (#8193)
onnx/onnx: docs/proposals/0010-GroupedMatMulOpProposal.md

table records the resulting behaviour for clarity.

| Case | Behaviour |
|---|---|
| `k == 0` | No expert selected, empty tensor output of shape `[M, 0, N]`. (Not expected in real model.) |
| `k == 1` | One expert per token, output of shape `[M, 1, N]`. |
| `G == 1`, all indices 0 | Equivalent to `MatMul(input, weights[0])` (+ optional bias). |
| `M == 0` | Zero-token input; output shape is `[0, k, N]`; no compute required. |
| Out-of-range index | Invalid input (implementations must raise an error). |

### Operator Specification

#### Name and Domain

| Field | Value |
|---|---|
| **Name** | `GroupedMatMul` |
| **Domain** | `ai.onnx` (standard) |
| **Opset version** | Next available opset (e.g. 27) |
| **Since version** | (new in this opset) |

#### Inputs

| Index | Name | Type | Required | Shape | Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 0 | `input` | T | **Required** | `[M, K]` | Row-major token matrix. `M` tokens, `K` is the contraction (hidden) dimension. |
| 1 | `weights` | T | **Required** | `[G, K, N]` | Stack of `G` expert weight matrices, each `K × N`. All experts share the same `K` and `N`. |

> | 2 | `group_indices` | tensor(int64) | **Required** | `[M, k]` | Group (expert) index per token per slot. Each of the `M` tokens selects `k` experts. Values must be in `[0, G)`. Use `k=1` for the dense (single-expert) case. |

Reviewer: The normative decomposition uses `Gather`, whose valid index range is `[-G, G)`. As written, `-1` selects the final expert in the function/reference evaluator, rather than raising the error required by `[0, G)`. Either add a normative range-validation step, or align the contract with `Gather`:

```suggestion
| 2 | `group_indices` | tensor(int64) | **Required** | `[M, k]` | Group (expert) index per token per slot. Each of the `M` tokens selects `k` experts. Values must be in `[-G, G)`; negative values select from the end, following `Gather` semantics. Use `k=1` for the dense (single-expert) case. |
```

<!--
Copyright (c) ONNX Project Contributors
-->

<!--- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 -->

- Feature Name: `grouped_matmul`
- Start Date: 2026-07-14
- RFC PR: [onnx/onnx#0000](https://github.com/onnx/onnx/pull/0000)

> - Status: under discussion

Author: Done.

> - Authors: gramalingam

Author: Done.

A standard top-k MoE FFN with two projections maps directly onto two `GroupedMatMul` ops.
No `Expand` of the token batch is required — the op reuses each token row across its `k`
selected experts internally.

```
# Notation: B = batch, S = sequence length, H = hidden dim, F = FFN inner dim
# E = num_experts, k = experts_per_token

scores          = Softmax(MatMul(hidden, router_W))          # [B, S, E]
values, indices = TopK(scores, k)                            # [B, S, k]

h   = Reshape(hidden,  [B*S, H])
idx = Reshape(indices, [B*S, k])
val = Reshape(values,  [B*S, k])

# --- Up projection: per-expert output, no combine ---
# output shape: [B*S, k, F]
h_up = GroupedMatMul(h, expert_gate_W, idx)       # + expert_gate_bias (optional)
h_up = SiLU(h_up)

# Reshape for down projection: treat each (token, expert-slot) pair as a row.
h_flat  = Reshape(h_up, [B*S*k, F])
idx2    = Reshape(idx,  [B*S*k, 1])               # each flat row still in one expert
val2    = Reshape(val,  [B*S*k, 1])               # combine weight (k=1 -> simple scale)

# --- Down projection: fused weighted-sum combine ---
# output shape: [B*S, H]
out = GroupedMatMul(h_flat, expert_down_W, idx2, val2)

> out = Reshape(out, [B, S, H])

Author: Fixed by removing the `combine_weights` input from the operator entirely (Option 1). After discussion we concluded `combine_weights` couldn't fuse the MoE down-projection weighted sum anyway: the `k` experts there have distinct per-slot inputs (their post-activation up-projection outputs), so the router-weighted sum reduces over a *different* grouping than the matmul's own `k`. `GroupedMatMul` now only performs the grouped matmul (+ optional per-group bias) and always outputs `[M, k, N]`; the down-projection example does the weighted sum explicitly with `Reshape` + `Mul` + `ReduceSum`. A dedicated fused down-projection op (matmul with `k=1` fused with a `ReduceSum` over a different group size) is noted under Future possibilities.

```

The up-projection uses the **no-combine** form because the activation must run per expert
before the reduce. The down-projection uses the **combine** form to fuse the top-k weighted
sum, avoiding a separate `Mul + ReduceSum` and the round-trip of the `[B*S*k, H]`

> intermediate through memory.

Author: Addressed: the explanatory text no longer claims the weighted-sum combine is fused. With `combine_weights` removed, both projections use `GroupedMatMul` purely for the grouped matmul, and the down-projection's top-k router-weighted sum is expressed explicitly with `Mul` + `ReduceSum` over the regrouped `k` slots.

#   token 3 -> group 1: [0,0, 1] @ [[0,1],[1,0],[ 0,1]] = [0+0+0, 0+0+1] = [0, 1]
output         = [[[2, 0]], [[1, 2]], [[1, 1]], [[0, 1]]]  # shape [4, 1, 2]
```

#### Test 2 — Top-k (k=2), no combine, with bias

```python
M, k, K, G, N = 2, 2, 2, 3, 2
input         = [[1.0, 0.0], [0.0, 1.0]]         # [2, 2]
weights       = [[[1,0],[0,1]], [[0,1],[1,0]], [[1,1],[0,0]]]  # [3,2,2]
group_indices = [[0, 1], [2, 0]]                  # [2, 2]
bias          = [[0.1, 0.2], [0.3, 0.0], [0.5, 0.5]]  # [3, 2]

# token 0, slot 0 -> g=0: [1,0] @ [[1,0],[0,1]] + [0.1,0.2] = [1.1, 0.2]
# token 0, slot 1 -> g=1: [1,0] @ [[0,1],[1,0]] + [0.3,0.0] = [0.3, 1.0]
# token 1, slot 0 -> g=2: [0,1] @ [[1,1],[0,0]] + [0.5,0.5] = [0.5, 0.5]
# token 1, slot 1 -> g=0: [0,1] @ [[1,0],[0,1]] + [0.1,0.2] = [0.1, 1.2]
output = [[[1.1, 0.2], [0.3, 1.0]],
          [[0.5, 0.5], [0.1, 1.2]]]   # [2, 2, 2]
```

#### Test 3 — Top-k (k=2) with combine, no bias

```python
M, k, K, G, N = 2, 2, 2, 3, 2
# (same input/weights/group_indices as Test 2, no bias)
combine_weights = [[0.6, 0.4], [0.3, 0.7]]       # [2, 2]

# token 0: 0.6*[1,0] + 0.4*[0,1] = [0.6, 0.4]
# token 1: 0.3*[0,1] + 0.7*[0,1] = [0.0, 1.0]

> output = [[0.6, 0.4], [0.0, 1.0]]                 # [2, 2]

Author: Done.
